## Introduction <a class="anchor" id="intro"></a>
Aave is the largest onchain decentralized lending and borrowing platform of cryptocurrencies. On January 30, 2024, the Aave community announced a rewards program called Merit, which aims to expand its user base and market dominance on the Ethereum blockchain. The program rewards users who borrow wrapped ETH (WETH) and GHO (Aave's own stablecoin). This project focuses on Merit's impact on WETH, and aims to answer the question: did Merit increase amount of WETH borrowed on Aave on the Ethereum blockchain? I apply [synthetic difference-in-differences](https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w25532/w25532.pdf), a causal inference method, to estimate the causal relationship between Merit and WETH borrowed from January 30, 2024 to April 30, 2024.  

## Aave and Merit Background <a class="anchor" id="background"></a>
Aave is an overcollateralized lending and borrowing platform. In order to borrow, a user must first supply collateral. For example, in order to borrow from the WETH pool, a user can supply USDC (or any other cryptocurrencies accepted by Aave) to the USDC pool. The interest rate paid on the WETH debt depends on the percentage of the WETH pool that has been borrowed. The higher the percentage, the higher the interest rate. See the [Aave documentation](https://docs.aave.com/hub) for more details. 

[Announced](https://governance.aave.com/t/temp-check-merit-a-new-aave-alignment-user-reward-system/16456) on Jan 30, 2024, the Merit program [allocates](https://snapshot.org/#/aave.eth/proposal/0xc80da83fadfe4f8a4c56e1643895cb7e9b1af1d9dcd374f1b41ded5c95b42f68) $2.1M in WETH and $2.9M in GHO for a 90-day duration to borrowers of these two assets, "focusing on direct Aave protocol engagement and promoting diversified staking strategies". In addition to the base rewards for borrowing, the program provides extra rewards (called Merit boosters) for specific behaviors, including: moving positions to Aave from completing platforms, usage of the AAVE token as collateteral, holding AAVE token for more than 100 days in the past year, and etc. The program also "punishes" a specific behavior, that is, the users of Morpho Optimizers cannot receive any rewards. The rewards were distributed 3 times over 90 days, on March 19, April 9, and April 30, 2024. More info on the encouraged and discouraged behaviors can be found [here](https://snapshot.org/#/aave.eth/proposal/0xc80da83fadfe4f8a4c56e1643895cb7e9b1af1d9dcd374f1b41ded5c95b42f68). Lastly, to prevent users from gaming the program, the details of how rewards would be calculated were not disclosed.

The purpose of this project is three fold:
1. Incentive programs have become commonplace in the crypto space, for a range of purposes from bootstrapping liquidity, encouraging community participation, to attracting users. The effectiveness of programs tend to be determined by comparing before and after outcomes. However, given the rapidly changing technological landscape and market dynamics of the industry, before-vs-after comparisons do not account for the confounding events occurring during the same time periods. This project aims to demonstrate a more statistically rigorous method, synthetic difference-in-differences, to evaluate causal, not correlational, impact. This is only one out of many causal inference methods, and the selection of the most suitable method depends the question one is trying to answer, as well as the context surrounding the question. 
2. To answer a causal question in a new field. Program evaluation in crypto has not received much attention from applied economists, but this could be an interesting area for research.
3. To encourage dialogue: if you have any questions or comments, please let me know! I'd love to hear your criticism of this study and other incentive programs that you think should be evaluated!

** For non-crypto native readers: when a user makes a transaction on a blockchain, the transaction is publicly and permanently recorded on the blockchain. That's how Aave can track whether its users are also using other platforms. However, a "user" is appears as an "address", which is a string of numbers and letters, and anyone can create as many addresses as he wants. The main difficulty of studying onchain user-level activity is that we cannot be sure who is behind each address. 

## Result Preview <a class="anchor" id="preview"></a>

Using synthetic difference-in-differences, I estimate that Merit's average treatment effect on the treated (ATT) for WETH is 99,283 WETH, with confidence interval (46,300, 152,268), which is highly statistically significant. In other words, Merit increased Aave's WETH borrowing on Ethereum by an average of 99,283 WETH (or $238 million at $2400 per ETH) over 90 days from Jan 30 to April 30. 

#### Cost Benefit Analysis

For a (very) rough estimate of the net gain from the Merit, I multiply the average WETH borrow interest rate over the last 12 months by the ATT to get the increase in revenu: $238 million * 2.43\% * 90/365 = \$1.43 million.

$2.1 million worth of WETH was distributed as incentives. Therefore, the net loss is $1.43 - $2.1 = -$0.67 million. Note that the Merit announcement did not disclose the actual amount of WETH distributed, not the USD/WETH exchange used to calculate the \$2.1 million. 
